---
title: AI for Learning and Feeling stupid organically
modified: 2026-01-12T01:07:41+08:00
date: 2026-01-11T23:56:19+08:00
---
> [!note] Fundamental Question
> 
> Is there a point in building something from scratch and getting stuck on your own?
> 
> Any studies on how to make this AI-assisted learning workflow effective?
> 
> There has to be a balance to strike between not wasting time getting stuck but also still encountering meaningful "stuck" for your brain to attempt recall and "save information".

# The workflow

Let's start from the conclusion of this study: the AI-assisted workflow.

- Start by mapping out a path to the answer. 
	- Do you know all the tools and concepts you'll need? Then proceed and don't look at the AI.
	- If you don't know the general process, then it's time to ask. 
- Ask, but do not look at the answer.
	- When asking AI for a derivation, look at the relevant concept headers. Then do it yourself.
	- When trying to code: ask, skim VERY quickly, then code it.
	- This scheme likely allows you to know if you can't do it yourself, but also allows you to do it yourself anyway.
- Get stuck: either glimpse the answer or prompt for a very specific part.

# Getting Stuck Matters

>[!quote]
>As a researcher, if you don't feel stupid everyday, you're doing something wrong.
> - Vague recollection of some meme or anecdote. I don't remember which.

- Desirable difficulty - introducing difficulties in the learning process improves long-term retention.
- Illusion of competence - you cannot generate neural pathways to the solution by reading the solution.

# Why against AI for learning?

There are not yet cognitive psychology studies on long/medium term learning retention with AI

However, personal observation (may be biased) seems like it does affect problem solving skills in the long term.

Hence, AI is likely detrimental to retention.

Additionally, we can predict the results of using AI by arguing using [the Generation effect]([https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.4.6.592](https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0278-7393.4.6.592)).

> [!note] The Generation effect
> On 5 experiments with 96 undergraduates, they compared memory for words that were generated by the subjects themselves vs the same words when presented to be read.
> 
> Retention is higher for self-generated words.
> 
> *But this is a mundane memory task. What if it was a problem solving or design task?* 

In Bjork & Bjork 2011, they coined "Desirable Difficulties". Particularly, 

>[!quote] 
>"Basically, any time that you, as a learner, look up an answer or have somebody tell or show you something that you could, drawing on current cues and your past knowledge, generate instead, you rob yourself of a powerful learning opportunity"

So if you give up on trying to remember and ask for help, you've lost? It may not be so gray.

For example, when trying to independently derive some sort of conclusion, instead of being unable to recall something, it may not be there at all. You're trying to squeeze an empty sponge. For example, a mathematical derivation requires some obscure Ring theorem- but you've never done Abstract Algebra.

Enter *productive failure*.

> [!note] Productive Failure
> If you lack the prerequisite concept (e.g., you don't know what functions are around to do a specific type of work), your struggle is **Unproductive Failure**. You are not "generating"; you are just guessing.
